
<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# afcharts <img src="man/figures/logo.svg" alt="afcharts logo" align="right" height="150"/>

<!-- badges: start -->

[![CRAN
status](https://www.r-pkg.org/badges/version/afcharts)](https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=afcharts)
[![R-CMD-check](https://github.com/best-practice-and-impact/afcharts/actions/workflows/R-CMD-check.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/best-practice-and-impact/afcharts/actions/workflows/R-CMD-check.yaml)
<!-- badges: end -->

afcharts is an R package for creating accessible plots by the Government
Analysis Function. Currently, functions are available for styling
ggplot2 plots.

The package has been developed using the [Government Analysis Function
Data Visualisation
guidance](https://analysisfunction.civilservice.gov.uk/policy-store/data-visualisation-charts/).
afcharts should be used in conjunction with these guidance documents.

More information about the package and its functions can be found on the
[afcharts
website](https://best-practice-and-impact.github.io/afcharts/). In
particular, the
[cookbook](https://best-practice-and-impact.github.io/afcharts/articles/cookbook.html)
contains lots of examples.

## Installation

### Install from CRAN

Install the latest release version of afcharts directly from CRAN:

``` r
install.packages("afcharts")
```

### Install from GitHub

afcharts can be installed directly from GitHub.

``` r
remotes::install_github(
  "best-practice-and-impact/afcharts",
  upgrade = "never",
  build_vignettes = TRUE,
  dependencies = TRUE
)
```

## Getting Started

Once installed, afcharts can be loaded using the `library()` function:

``` r
library(afcharts)
```

Help files for each function in the package can be found on the
[References](https://best-practice-and-impact.github.io/afcharts/reference/)
page of the package website. Alternatively, type `?function_name` into
the RStudio console. For example:

``` r
?theme_af()
```

### Use afcharts as default

The easiest way to use afcharts is by adding `use_afcharts()` to the
beginning of your R script, Rmarkdown document or Shiny app code. This
function will set a number of defaults to ggplot2 geoms, use afcharts
colour palettes and use `theme_af()`.

#### Example 1: Bar chart with one colour using ggplot2 defaults

``` r
library(ggplot2)
library(dplyr)
library(gapminder)
library(afcharts)

gapminder |> 
  filter(year == 2007 & continent == "Americas") |>
  slice_max(order_by = pop, n = 5) |>
  ggplot() +
  geom_col(aes(x = reorder(country, -pop), y = pop)) +
  scale_y_continuous(
    labels = scales::label_number(scale = 1E-6),
    limits = c(0, 350E6),
    expand = expansion(mult = c(0, 0.1))
  ) +
  scale_fill_discrete_af("focus", reverse = TRUE) +
  labs(
    x = NULL,
    y = NULL,
    title = "The U.S.A. is the most populous country in\nthe Americas",
    subtitle = "Population of countries in the Americas (millions), 2007",
    caption = "Source: Gapminder"
    )
```

<img src="man/figures/README-ex1-1.svg" alt="A bar chart with grey background, white grid lines and dark grey bars."  />

#### Example 2: Bar chart of one colour using afcharts defaults

``` r
afcharts::use_afcharts()

gapminder |> 
  filter(year == 2007 & continent == "Americas") |>
  slice_max(order_by = pop, n = 5) |>
  ggplot(aes(x = reorder(country, -pop), y = pop)) +
  geom_col(fill = af_colour_values["dark-blue"]) +
  scale_y_continuous(
    labels = scales::label_number(scale = 1E-6),
    limits = c(0, 350E6),
    expand = c(0, 0),expansion(mult = c(0, 0.1))
  ) +
  labs(
    x = NULL,
    y = NULL,
    title = "The U.S.A. is the most populous country in\nthe Americas",
    subtitle = "Population of countries in the Americas (millions), 2007",
    caption = "Source: Gapminder"
  )
```

<img src="man/figures/README-ex2-1.svg" alt="A bar chart with white background, light grey horizontal grid lines, and dark blue bars."  />

#### Example 3: Multiple colour line chart with afcharts formatting

``` r
afcharts::use_afcharts()

gapminder |>
  filter(country %in% c("United Kingdom", "China")) |>
  ggplot(aes(x = year, y = lifeExp, colour = country)) +
  geom_line(linewidth = 1) +
  scale_y_continuous(
    breaks = seq(0, 80, 20),
    limits = c(0, 82),
    expand = expansion(mult = c(0, 0.1))
  ) +
  scale_x_continuous(breaks = seq(1952, 2007, 5)) +
  labs(
    x = "Year",
    y = NULL,
    title = "Living Longer",
    subtitle = "Life Expectancy in the United Kingdom and China 1952-2007",
    caption = "Source: Gapminder",
    colour = NULL
  )
```

<img src="man/figures/README-ex3-1.svg" alt="A line chart with white background,
                 light grey horizontal grid lines, an orange line, and a dark blue
                 line."  />

**Note on use of titles, subtitles and captions** <br> Titles, subtitles
and captions have been embedded in these example charts for
demonstration purposes. However, for accessibility reasons, it is
usually preferable to provide titles in the body of the page rather than
embedded within the image of the plot. More information is available in
the [accessibility
article](https://best-practice-and-impact.github.io/afcharts/articles/accessibility.html#other-accessibility-considerations).

## Acknowledgments

The afcharts package is based on the
[sgplot](https://scotgovanalysis.github.io/sgplot/index.html) package,
written by Alice Hannah.

## Licence

Unless stated otherwise, the codebase is released under [the MIT
License](LICENSE). This covers both the codebase and any sample code in
the documentation.

The documentation is [Â© Crown
copyright](https://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/information-management/re-using-public-sector-information/uk-government-licensing-framework/crown-copyright/)
and available under the terms of the [Open Government
3.0](https://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3/)
licence.
